README.md, before:

# 🐋 Sperm Whale Phonetic Alphabet Explorer

**✅ FULLY IMPLEMENTED & WORKING** 

An open-source Python tool for exploring the newly discovered phonetic alphabet of sperm whale communication, based on the groundbreaking May 2024 research finding 143+ distinct click combinations.

![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-Production%20Ready-brightgreen)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.11+-blue)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green)

## 🌊 What's Been Accomplished

**✅ SCIENTIFICALLY ACCURATE & PRODUCTION READY**

This tool has been **extensively validated with real whale data** and includes **critical scientific accuracy improvements**:

- ✅ **Analyzes real whale audio** from the Watkins Marine Mammal Database (1962-1991)
- ✅ **Scientifically accurate click detection** (2-20 kHz filtering with parameter transparency)  
- ✅ **Biologically meaningful tempo** calculation (actual clicks/second, not intervals)
- ✅ **Conservative rhythm detection** (no false complex patterns)
- ✅ **Pattern-relative ornamentation** detection (context-aware analysis)
- ✅ **Echolocation filtering** (separates navigation from communication)
- ✅ **Confidence scoring** for all detections (uncertainty quantification)
- ✅ **Interactive web interface** with real-time analysis and visualizations
- ✅ **Publication-ready results** validated against marine biology literature

## 🎯 Real Whale Data Results (January 2025)

**✅ VERIFIED WITH AUTHENTIC SPERM WHALE RECORDINGS**

**Analyzed 5 professional recordings spanning 60+ years (1962-1991):**

| Recording | Duration | Clicks | Codas | Real Communication Patterns |
|-----------|----------|--------|-------|----------------------------|
| watkins_91003005.wav | 17.8s | 93 | 2 | `38_medium_high`, `2+2+1+2+48_fast_high` |
| watkins_91003001.wav | 17.8s | 46 | 2 | `28_medium_high`, `18_medium_high` |
| watkins_72009001.wav | 5.2s | 41 | 1 | `2+3+3+33_fast_high` |
| watkins_62031001.wav | 1.4s | 9 | 1 | `9_fast_high` |
| watkins_85004001.wav | 2.8s | 10 | 1 | `10_fast_high` |

**📊 Scientific Summary:**
- **45.0 seconds** total whale audio processed
- **199 whale clicks** detected with 90-100% confidence  
- **7 authentic communication codas** identified
- **7 unique phonetic patterns** discovered (all biologically meaningful)
- **0 false echolocation** classifications (perfect filtering)
- **Tempo range**: 2.9-9.2 clicks/second (realistic biological speeds)

## 🔬 Scientific Accuracy Improvements (January 2025)

**✅ CRITICAL ISSUES RESOLVED**

This version includes major scientific accuracy fixes that make results **publication-ready**:

### Before vs After Comparison

**❌ BEFORE (Problematic):**
- `3+5+6+4+4+3+3+3+3+3+4+4+1+3_fast_high_orn` (impossible 14-group rhythm)
- Tempo calculated as "intervals per second" (confusing for biologists)
- Silent parameter changes (20kHz → 38.9kHz without warning)
- No distinction between echolocation and communication
- No confidence measures or uncertainty quantification

**✅ AFTER (Scientifically Accurate):**
- `2+3+3+33_fast_high` (biologically meaningful 4-group structure)
- Tempo: **8.0 clicks/second** (clear biological interpretation)
- Parameter transparency: **"2-20kHz based on Gero et al. 2016"**
- Perfect **echolocation vs communication** distinction
- **Confidence scoring**: detection=1.00, rhythm=0.10, classification=0.50

### Key Improvements

1. **🎯 Fixed Rhythm Detection** - Eliminated off-by-one counting error that created impossible patterns
2. **⚡ Corrected Tempo Calculation** - Now measures actual clicks/second for biological meaning
3. **🎵 Conservative Pattern Detection** - Uses statistical thresholds to avoid false complexity
4. **✨ Smart Ornamentation Detection** - Pattern-relative analysis prevents false positives
5. **🔍 Echolocation Filtering** - Separates navigation clicks from social communication
6. **📊 Confidence Scoring** - Quantifies uncertainty in all measurements
7. **🔧 Parameter Transparency** - Scientists know exactly what's being measured
8. **📚 Scientific References** - All parameters justified with literature citations

### Research Impact

- **Marine Biology**: Publication-ready results aligned with established research
- **Conservation**: Reliable communication analysis for whale protection
- **Education**: Scientifically accurate exploration of whale language
- **Citizen Science**: Trustworthy automated detection for community projects

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11+ (tested and verified)
- `uv` package manager (or pip as fallback)

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/nielsenz/ceti-whale-sounds.git
   cd ceti-whale-sounds
   ```

2. **Create and activate environment** 
   ```bash
   uv venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   uv sync  # Or: pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Download real whale data**
   ```bash
   python scripts/download_sample_data.py
   ```
   *Downloads 5 verified sperm whale recordings (6.6MB total)*

### Running the Application

1. **Launch the web interface**
   ```bash
   streamlit run app.py
   ```

2. **Open your browser** to `http://localhost:8501`

3. **Start analyzing whale communication!**

## 🔬 What You Can Do

**Upload whale recordings or use the included samples to:**

- 🎵 **Visualize audio** - see waveforms, energy envelopes, and detected clicks
- 🔍 **Discover patterns** - automatic detection of rhythm structures like "2+3+1+3+2+3"
- ⚡ **Analyze tempo** - categorize communication speed (slow/medium/fast)
- 🎼 **Measure rubato** - detect timing variations that add "expression"
- ✨ **Find ornamentation** - identify decorative extra clicks
- 📊 **Interactive exploration** - filter by patterns, adjust detection parameters
- 🎧 **Audio playback** - listen to individual codas and communication patterns

## 📁 Project Structure

```
whale-phonetic-explorer/
├── data/
│   ├── raw/                 # Original whale recordings
│   ├── processed/           # Analysis results
│   └── annotations/         # Labeled data
├── src/
│   ├── click_detector.py    # Click detection algorithms
│   ├── coda_detector.py     # Coda grouping logic
│   ├── feature_extractor.py # Phonetic feature analysis
│   └── visualization.py     # Plotting utilities
├── notebooks/
│   ├── 01_explore_audio.ipynb
│   ├── 02_click_detection.ipynb
│   └── 03_feature_analysis.ipynb
├── scripts/
│   └── download_sample_data.py
├── tests/
├── app.py                   # Streamlit web interface
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

## 🔬 How It Works

### 1. Click Detection
- Applies bandpass filtering (2-20 kHz) to isolate whale clicks
- Uses energy envelope analysis to identify click timing
- Dynamically adjusts detection thresholds

### 2. Coda Grouping
- Groups clicks separated by <2 seconds into communication units
- Filters for codas with 3+ clicks (minimum meaningful pattern)
- Calculates inter-click intervals (ICIs)

### 3. Phonetic Feature Extraction

#### Rhythm Pattern
- Detects pause-based groupings (e.g., "1+3", "2+3")
- Identifies structural patterns in click sequences

#### Tempo Analysis
- Measures clicks per second
- Categorizes as slow (<2 cps), medium (2-4 cps), or fast (>4 cps)

#### Rubato Detection
- Quantifies timing irregularities
- Higher rubato = more "expressive" timing variations

#### Ornamentation
- Identifies extra decorative clicks beyond basic patterns
- Counts ornamental additions to standard structures

## 📊 Sample Data Sources

This project uses recordings from the **Watkins Marine Mammal Sound Database**:

- **Primary Source**: https://cis.whoi.edu/science/B/whalesounds/
- **Species**: *Physeter macrocephalus* (Sperm whale)
- **Recommended Files**: 6569, 6571, 6572, 1036, 1419
- **Quality**: Professionally recorded and verified
- **License**: Free for research use

## 🎯 Usage Examples

### Command Line Analysis
```python
from src.click_detector import ClickDetector
from src.coda_detector import CodaDetector
import soundfile as sf

# Load audio
audio, sr = sf.read('data/raw/whale_recording.wav')

# Detect clicks
detector = ClickDetector(sr)
clicks, _, _ = detector.detect_clicks(audio)

# Group into codas
coda_detector = CodaDetector()
codas = coda_detector.group_clicks_to_codas(clicks)

print(f"Found {len(clicks)} clicks in {len(codas)} codas")
```

### Web Interface Features
- **Pattern Browser**: Explore different rhythm/tempo combinations
- **Audio Player**: Listen to individual codas
- **Search & Filter**: Find specific phonetic patterns
- **Export Results**: Download analysis data

## 🧪 Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest tests/

# Run with coverage
pytest tests/ --cov=src

# Run specific test module
pytest tests/test_click_detector.py
```

## 📈 Performance Benchmarks

**✅ VERIFIED WITH REAL WHALE DATA**

- **Click Detection**: 90-100% confidence on professional whale recordings
- **Pattern Recognition**: 7/7 biologically meaningful patterns discovered
- **Echolocation Filtering**: 100% accuracy (0 false classifications)
- **Processing Speed**: ~45 seconds of whale audio analyzed in real-time
- **Memory Usage**: <500MB for typical recordings
- **Supported Formats**: WAV (primary), FLAC, MP3
- **Scientific Accuracy**: Publication-ready results validated against marine biology literature

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions from marine biologists, developers, and whale enthusiasts!

### Areas for Contribution
- **Algorithm Improvements**: Better click detection methods
- **New Features**: Real-time analysis, mobile app
- **Data Sources**: Additional whale recording databases
- **Visualization**: Enhanced pattern exploration tools

### Development Setup
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch: `git checkout -b feature-name`
3. Make changes and add tests
4. Run tests: `pytest`
5. Submit pull request

### Code Standards
- Follow PEP 8 style guidelines
- Add docstrings to all functions
- Include unit tests for new features
- Update documentation as needed

## 📚 Scientific Background

This project is based on research published in *Nature Communications* (May 2024) that revealed sperm whales use a phonetic alphabet with 143+ distinct patterns. The four key components identified are:

1. **Rhythm**: Temporal grouping patterns
2. **Tempo**: Overall click rate
3. **Rubato**: Timing variations within patterns
4. **Ornamentation**: Decorative click additions

## 🐋 Conservation Impact

Understanding whale communication helps:
- **Protect critical habitats** through acoustic monitoring
- **Reduce ship strike risks** via whale presence detection
- **Study social structures** and cultural transmission
- **Advocate for conservation** with concrete data

## 📅 Development History & Achievements

### 🎉 **January 28, 2025 - Initial Release**

**Complete Implementation Achieved in Single Session:**

#### ✅ **Core Algorithm Development**
- **Click Detection Engine** (`src/click_detector.py`)
  - Energy-based detection with bandpass filtering (2-20 kHz)
  - Adaptive thresholding using signal statistics
  - Hilbert transform for envelope calculation
  - 14-192 clicks detected per recording

- **Coda Grouping System** (`src/coda_detector.py`)
  - Inter-click interval analysis for natural grouping
  - Configurable parameters (max ICI: 2.0s, min clicks: 3)
  - Automatic rhythm pattern detection
  - Successfully grouped clicks into 1-4 codas per recording

- **Phonetic Feature Extractor** (`src/feature_extractor.py`)
  - **Rhythm Analysis**: Complex multi-group patterns (up to 14 groups)
  - **Tempo Classification**: Slow/medium/fast categorization
  - **Rubato Measurement**: Timing variation quantification
  - **Ornamentation Detection**: Extra click identification
  - Generated 7 unique phonetic codes from test data

#### 🎵 **Real Data Integration**
- **Watkins Database Integration** (`scripts/download_sample_data.py`)
  - Successfully connected to Watkins Marine Mammal Sound Database
  - Downloaded 5 verified sperm whale recordings (6.6MB total)
  - Files from 1962-1991 recordings (Dominica, Atlantic, Pacific locations)
  - Automatic verification and metadata generation

#### 🖥️ **Interactive Web Interface** (`app.py`)
- **Full Streamlit Application** with professional UI
- **Real-time Analysis Pipeline** with progress tracking
- **Interactive Visualizations** using Plotly
- **Audio Upload Support** for user recordings
- **Parameter Tuning Interface** for detection sensitivity
- **Pattern Exploration Tools** with filtering and search

#### 📊 **Proven Scientific Results**
- **7 Unique Phonetic Patterns** discovered across recordings
- **Complex Rhythms Detected**: `2+3+1+3+2+3_fast_high_orn`
- **Multi-group Patterns**: Up to 14 rhythm groups in single codas
- **Tempo Variations**: Fast (4+ cps) to medium (2-4 cps) ranges
- **High Rubato Levels**: Significant timing expression detected
- **Ornamentation Present**: Extra decorative clicks identified

#### 🛠️ **Technical Infrastructure**
- **Modern Python Stack**: Python 3.11 with `uv` dependency management
- **Scientific Libraries**: NumPy, SciPy, librosa, pandas integration
- **Production Ready**: Proper error handling, logging, documentation
- **Version Control**: Git repository with comprehensive commit history
- **Open Source**: MIT license, full GitHub integration

### 🏆 **Key Milestones Achieved**

| Milestone | Status | Details |
|-----------|--------|---------|
| Algorithm Implementation | ✅ Complete | All 4 phonetic features extracted |
| Real Data Testing | ✅ Complete | 5 recordings, 7 patterns discovered |
| Web Interface | ✅ Complete | Full Streamlit app with visualizations |
| Scientific Validation | ✅ Complete | Results match expected research patterns |
| Documentation | ✅ Complete | Comprehensive guides and examples |
| Open Source Release | ✅ Complete | GitHub repository ready |

### 🔬 **Research Impact**

This implementation represents the **first open-source tool** for analyzing the newly discovered sperm whale phonetic alphabet, making cutting-edge marine biology research accessible to:

- **Marine Biologists** - Pattern discovery and analysis
- **Bioacoustics Researchers** - Automated feature extraction
- **Conservation Organizations** - Whale communication monitoring
- **Citizen Scientists** - Educational exploration of whale language
- **Students & Educators** - Hands-on learning about marine intelligence

---

*"This tool transforms groundbreaking research into actionable conservation technology."*

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **Watkins Marine Mammal Sound Database** for providing freely accessible whale recordings
- **The research team** who discovered the sperm whale phonetic alphabet
- **SoundFile developers** for excellent audio processing tools
- **Marine biology community** for inspiring this work

## 📞 Contact & Support

- **Issues**: Report bugs or request features via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/your-username/whale-phonetic-explorer/issues)
- **Discussions**: Join conversations in [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/your-username/whale-phonetic-explorer/discussions)
- **Email**: [your-email@example.com](mailto:your-email@example.com)

---

*"The sea, once it casts its spell, holds one in its net of wonder forever."* - Jacques Cousteau

Help us decode the language of the deep! 🌊

Commit message:

Able to listen to the whale sounds

README.md, after:

# 🐋 Sperm Whale Phonetic Alphabet Explorer

**✅ FULLY IMPLEMENTED & WORKING** 

An open-source Python tool for exploring the newly discovered phonetic alphabet of sperm whale communication, based on the groundbreaking May 2024 research finding 143+ distinct click combinations.

![Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-Production%20Ready-brightgreen)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.11+-blue)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green)

## 🌊 What's Been Accomplished

**✅ SCIENTIFICALLY ACCURATE & PRODUCTION READY**

This tool has been **extensively validated with real whale data** and includes **critical scientific accuracy improvements**:

- ✅ **Analyzes real whale audio** from the Watkins Marine Mammal Database (1962-1991)
- ✅ **Scientifically accurate click detection** (2-20 kHz filtering with parameter transparency)  
- ✅ **Biologically meaningful tempo** calculation (actual clicks/second, not intervals)
- ✅ **Conservative rhythm detection** (no false complex patterns)
- ✅ **Pattern-relative ornamentation** detection (context-aware analysis)
- ✅ **Echolocation filtering** (separates navigation from communication)
- ✅ **Confidence scoring** for all detections (uncertainty quantification)
- ✅ **Interactive web interface** with real-time analysis and visualizations
- ✅ **Publication-ready results** validated against marine biology literature

## 🎯 Real Whale Data Results (January 2025)

**✅ VERIFIED WITH AUTHENTIC SPERM WHALE RECORDINGS**

**Analyzed 5 professional recordings spanning 60+ years (1962-1991):**

| Recording | Duration | Clicks | Codas | Real Communication Patterns |
|-----------|----------|--------|-------|----------------------------|
| watkins_91003005.wav | 17.8s | 93 | 2 | `38_medium_high`, `2+2+1+2+48_fast_high` |
| watkins_91003001.wav | 17.8s | 46 | 2 | `28_medium_high`, `18_medium_high` |
| watkins_72009001.wav | 5.2s | 41 | 1 | `2+3+3+33_fast_high` |
| watkins_62031001.wav | 1.4s | 9 | 1 | `9_fast_high` |
| watkins_85004001.wav | 2.8s | 10 | 1 | `10_fast_high` |

**📊 Scientific Summary:**
- **45.0 seconds** total whale audio processed
- **199 whale clicks** detected with 90-100% confidence  
- **7 authentic communication codas** identified
- **7 unique phonetic patterns** discovered (all biologically meaningful)
- **0 false echolocation** classifications (perfect filtering)
- **Tempo range**: 2.9-9.2 clicks/second (realistic biological speeds)

## 🔬 Scientific Accuracy Improvements (January 2025)

**✅ CRITICAL ISSUES RESOLVED**

This version includes major scientific accuracy fixes that make results **publication-ready**:

### Before vs After Comparison

**❌ BEFORE (Problematic):**
- `3+5+6+4+4+3+3+3+3+3+4+4+1+3_fast_high_orn` (impossible 14-group rhythm)
- Tempo calculated as "intervals per second" (confusing for biologists)
- Silent parameter changes (20kHz → 38.9kHz without warning)
- No distinction between echolocation and communication
- No confidence measures or uncertainty quantification

**✅ AFTER (Scientifically Accurate):**
- `2+3+3+33_fast_high` (biologically meaningful 4-group structure)
- Tempo: **8.0 clicks/second** (clear biological interpretation)
- Parameter transparency: **"2-20kHz based on Gero et al. 2016"**
- Perfect **echolocation vs communication** distinction
- **Confidence scoring**: detection=1.00, rhythm=0.10, classification=0.50

### Key Improvements

1. **🎯 Fixed Rhythm Detection** - Eliminated off-by-one counting error that created impossible patterns
2. **⚡ Corrected Tempo Calculation** - Now measures actual clicks/second for biological meaning
3. **🎵 Conservative Pattern Detection** - Uses statistical thresholds to avoid false complexity
4. **✨ Smart Ornamentation Detection** - Pattern-relative analysis prevents false positives
5. **🔍 Echolocation Filtering** - Separates navigation clicks from social communication
6. **📊 Confidence Scoring** - Quantifies uncertainty in all measurements
7. **🔧 Parameter Transparency** - Scientists know exactly what's being measured
8. **📚 Scientific References** - All parameters justified with literature citations

### Research Impact

- **Marine Biology**: Publication-ready results aligned with established research
- **Conservation**: Reliable communication analysis for whale protection
- **Education**: Scientifically accurate exploration of whale language
- **Citizen Science**: Trustworthy automated detection for community projects

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.11+ (tested and verified)
- `uv` package manager (or pip as fallback)

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/nielsenz/ceti-whale-sounds.git
   cd ceti-whale-sounds
   ```

2. **Create and activate environment** 
   ```bash
   uv venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   uv sync  # Or: pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Download real whale data**
   ```bash
   python scripts/download_sample_data.py
   ```
   *Downloads 5 verified sperm whale recordings (6.6MB total)*

### Running the Application

1. **Launch the web interface**
   ```bash
   streamlit run app.py
   ```

2. **Open your browser** to `http://localhost:8501`

3. **Start analyzing whale communication!**

## 🔬 What You Can Do

**Upload whale recordings or use the included samples to:**

- 🎵 **Visualize audio** - see waveforms, energy envelopes, and detected clicks
- 🔍 **Discover patterns** - automatic detection of rhythm structures like "2+3+1+3+2+3"
- ⚡ **Analyze tempo** - categorize communication speed (slow/medium/fast)
- 🎼 **Measure rubato** - detect timing variations that add "expression"
- ✨ **Find ornamentation** - identify decorative extra clicks
- 📊 **Interactive exploration** - filter by patterns, adjust detection parameters
- 🎧 **Audio playback** - listen to full recordings and individual whale communication patterns
- 🔊 **Interactive audio players** - play specific codas with context buffering for clear listening

## 📁 Project Structure

```
whale-phonetic-explorer/
├── data/
│   ├── raw/                 # Original whale recordings
│   ├── processed/           # Analysis results
│   └── annotations/         # Labeled data
├── src/
│   ├── click_detector.py    # Click detection algorithms
│   ├── coda_detector.py     # Coda grouping logic
│   ├── feature_extractor.py # Phonetic feature analysis
│   └── visualization.py     # Plotting utilities
├── notebooks/
│   ├── 01_explore_audio.ipynb
│   ├── 02_click_detection.ipynb
│   └── 03_feature_analysis.ipynb
├── scripts/
│   └── download_sample_data.py
├── tests/
├── app.py                   # Streamlit web interface
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

## 🔬 How It Works

### 1. Click Detection
- Applies bandpass filtering (2-20 kHz) to isolate whale clicks
- Uses energy envelope analysis to identify click timing
- Dynamically adjusts detection thresholds

### 2. Coda Grouping
- Groups clicks separated by <2 seconds into communication units
- Filters for codas with 3+ clicks (minimum meaningful pattern)
- Calculates inter-click intervals (ICIs)

### 3. Phonetic Feature Extraction

#### Rhythm Pattern
- Detects pause-based groupings (e.g., "1+3", "2+3")
- Identifies structural patterns in click sequences

#### Tempo Analysis
- Measures clicks per second
- Categorizes as slow (<2 cps), medium (2-4 cps), or fast (>4 cps)

#### Rubato Detection
- Quantifies timing irregularities
- Higher rubato = more "expressive" timing variations

#### Ornamentation
- Identifies extra decorative clicks beyond basic patterns
- Counts ornamental additions to standard structures

## 📊 Sample Data Sources

This project uses recordings from the **Watkins Marine Mammal Sound Database**:

- **Primary Source**: https://cis.whoi.edu/science/B/whalesounds/
- **Species**: *Physeter macrocephalus* (Sperm whale)
- **Recommended Files**: 6569, 6571, 6572, 1036, 1419
- **Quality**: Professionally recorded and verified
- **License**: Free for research use

## 🎯 Usage Examples

### Command Line Analysis
```python
from src.click_detector import ClickDetector
from src.coda_detector import CodaDetector
import soundfile as sf

# Load audio
audio, sr = sf.read('data/raw/whale_recording.wav')

# Detect clicks
detector = ClickDetector(sr)
clicks, _, _ = detector.detect_clicks(audio)

# Group into codas
coda_detector = CodaDetector()
codas = coda_detector.group_clicks_to_codas(clicks)

print(f"Found {len(clicks)} clicks in {len(codas)} codas")
```

### Web Interface Features
- **Pattern Browser**: Explore different rhythm/tempo combinations
- **Audio Playback**: Listen to full recordings and individual whale codas with smart buffering
- **Interactive Players**: Select and play specific communication patterns with time range display
- **Search & Filter**: Find specific phonetic patterns
- **Export Results**: Download analysis data

## 🧪 Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest tests/

# Run with coverage
pytest tests/ --cov=src

# Run specific test module
pytest tests/test_click_detector.py
```

## 📈 Performance Benchmarks

**✅ VERIFIED WITH REAL WHALE DATA**

- **Click Detection**: 90-100% confidence on professional whale recordings
- **Pattern Recognition**: 7/7 biologically meaningful patterns discovered
- **Echolocation Filtering**: 100% accuracy (0 false classifications)
- **Processing Speed**: ~45 seconds of whale audio analyzed in real-time
- **Memory Usage**: <500MB for typical recordings
- **Supported Formats**: WAV (primary), FLAC, MP3
- **Scientific Accuracy**: Publication-ready results validated against marine biology literature

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions from marine biologists, developers, and whale enthusiasts!

### Areas for Contribution
- **Algorithm Improvements**: Better click detection methods
- **New Features**: Real-time analysis, mobile app
- **Data Sources**: Additional whale recording databases
- **Visualization**: Enhanced pattern exploration tools

### Development Setup
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch: `git checkout -b feature-name`
3. Make changes and add tests
4. Run tests: `pytest`
5. Submit pull request

### Code Standards
- Follow PEP 8 style guidelines
- Add docstrings to all functions
- Include unit tests for new features
- Update documentation as needed

## 📚 Scientific Background

This project is based on research published in *Nature Communications* (May 2024) that revealed sperm whales use a phonetic alphabet with 143+ distinct patterns. The four key components identified are:

1. **Rhythm**: Temporal grouping patterns
2. **Tempo**: Overall click rate
3. **Rubato**: Timing variations within patterns
4. **Ornamentation**: Decorative click additions

## 🐋 Conservation Impact

Understanding whale communication helps:
- **Protect critical habitats** through acoustic monitoring
- **Reduce ship strike risks** via whale presence detection
- **Study social structures** and cultural transmission
- **Advocate for conservation** with concrete data

## 📅 Development History & Achievements

### 🎉 **January 28, 2025 - Initial Release**

**Complete Implementation Achieved in Single Session:**

#### ✅ **Core Algorithm Development**
- **Click Detection Engine** (`src/click_detector.py`)
  - Energy-based detection with bandpass filtering (2-20 kHz)
  - Adaptive thresholding using signal statistics
  - Hilbert transform for envelope calculation
  - 14-192 clicks detected per recording

- **Coda Grouping System** (`src/coda_detector.py`)
  - Inter-click interval analysis for natural grouping
  - Configurable parameters (max ICI: 2.0s, min clicks: 3)
  - Automatic rhythm pattern detection
  - Successfully grouped clicks into 1-4 codas per recording

- **Phonetic Feature Extractor** (`src/feature_extractor.py`)
  - **Rhythm Analysis**: Complex multi-group patterns (up to 14 groups)
  - **Tempo Classification**: Slow/medium/fast categorization
  - **Rubato Measurement**: Timing variation quantification
  - **Ornamentation Detection**: Extra click identification
  - Generated 7 unique phonetic codes from test data

#### 🎵 **Real Data Integration**
- **Watkins Database Integration** (`scripts/download_sample_data.py`)
  - Successfully connected to Watkins Marine Mammal Sound Database
  - Downloaded 5 verified sperm whale recordings (6.6MB total)
  - Files from 1962-1991 recordings (Dominica, Atlantic, Pacific locations)
  - Automatic verification and metadata generation

#### 🖥️ **Interactive Web Interface** (`app.py`)
- **Full Streamlit Application** with professional UI
- **Real-time Analysis Pipeline** with progress tracking
- **Interactive Visualizations** using Plotly
- **Audio Upload Support** for user recordings
- **Parameter Tuning Interface** for detection sensitivity
- **Pattern Exploration Tools** with filtering and search
- **Audio Playback System** with full recording and individual coda players (August 2025)

#### 📊 **Proven Scientific Results**
- **7 Unique Phonetic Patterns** discovered across recordings
- **Complex Rhythms Detected**: `2+3+1+3+2+3_fast_high_orn`
- **Multi-group Patterns**: Up to 14 rhythm groups in single codas
- **Tempo Variations**: Fast (4+ cps) to medium (2-4 cps) ranges
- **High Rubato Levels**: Significant timing expression detected
- **Ornamentation Present**: Extra decorative clicks identified

#### 🛠️ **Technical Infrastructure**
- **Modern Python Stack**: Python 3.11 with `uv` dependency management
- **Scientific Libraries**: NumPy, SciPy, librosa, pandas integration
- **Production Ready**: Proper error handling, logging, documentation
- **Version Control**: Git repository with comprehensive commit history
- **Open Source**: MIT license, full GitHub integration

### 🏆 **Key Milestones Achieved**

| Milestone | Status | Details |
|-----------|--------|---------|
| Algorithm Implementation | ✅ Complete | All 4 phonetic features extracted |
| Real Data Testing | ✅ Complete | 5 recordings, 7 patterns discovered |
| Web Interface | ✅ Complete | Full Streamlit app with visualizations |
| Scientific Validation | ✅ Complete | Results match expected research patterns |
| Documentation | ✅ Complete | Comprehensive guides and examples |
| Open Source Release | ✅ Complete | GitHub repository ready |

### 🔬 **Research Impact**

This implementation represents the **first open-source tool** for analyzing the newly discovered sperm whale phonetic alphabet, making cutting-edge marine biology research accessible to:

- **Marine Biologists** - Pattern discovery and analysis
- **Bioacoustics Researchers** - Automated feature extraction
- **Conservation Organizations** - Whale communication monitoring
- **Citizen Scientists** - Educational exploration of whale language
- **Students & Educators** - Hands-on learning about marine intelligence

---

*"This tool transforms groundbreaking research into actionable conservation technology."*

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **Watkins Marine Mammal Sound Database** for providing freely accessible whale recordings
- **The research team** who discovered the sperm whale phonetic alphabet
- **SoundFile developers** for excellent audio processing tools
- **Marine biology community** for inspiring this work

## 📞 Contact & Support

- **Issues**: Report bugs or request features via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/your-username/whale-phonetic-explorer/issues)
- **Discussions**: Join conversations in [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/your-username/whale-phonetic-explorer/discussions)
- **Email**: [your-email@example.com](mailto:your-email@example.com)

---

*"The sea, once it casts its spell, holds one in its net of wonder forever."* - Jacques Cousteau

Help us decode the language of the deep! 🌊
